It will be the source of our study here on Wednesday evening for the next four weeks.
And we're going to walk through this psalm.
I trust that it'll be a blessing to you.
And this particular psalm has four distinct divisions consisting of two verses each.
And so we'll take the next four weeks and we'll look at two verses each week.
And again, trust that it'll be a blessing to you.
I love the book of Psalms.
If you read through the book of Psalms, you will find that often you are greatly encouraged
as you read the book of Psalms.
It is exciting to me to have the opportunity to see how often the transparency of the psalmist
and it enables us really to be able to relate to the psalmist and to relate to life and
difficulties and triumphs and all that we deal with.
And of course, as we study through the book of Psalms and read the Psalms devotionally,
oftentimes our hearts are greatly encouraged through this particular book.
This evening, as I mentioned, we'll be looking at Psalm 3.
And over the next several weeks, I'm going to read the entire psalm this evening.
And then we'll get into the message for this evening, part one, if you will.
And the Bible says this,
Lord, how are they increased that trouble me?
Many are they that rise up against me.
Many there be which say of my soul, there is no help for him in God, Selah.
But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me, my glory and the lifter up of mine head.
I cried unto the Lord with my voice and he heard me out of his holy hill, Selah.
I laid me down and slept.
I awaked for the Lord sustained me.
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me round about.
Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God, for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheekbone.
Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
Salvation belongeth unto the Lord.
Thy blessing is upon thy people, Selah.
As you look at the book of Psalms, it's often very helpful to understand the setting of
the particular psalm that you're studying.
And this evening and for the next several weeks as we study Psalm 3, you will note if
perhaps at the top of your Bible, if there's some level of inscription with regard to the
setting of the particular psalm, your Bible may say that this is a psalm of David when
he fled from Absalom.
And we are helped by understanding, obviously, if you study the life of David in its fullness,
you'll find there are many times in which he's dealing with difficulty and trials, of
course, the times in which he's leaving and fleeing the presence of Saul.
But this particular psalm is written according to the historical background that we have,
that it was written when he fled from Absalom, his son, not while he was fleeing from Saul,
but rather when he was fleeing from Absalom.
That portion of Scripture that records for us the rebellion, really, of Absalom and all
that takes place is found beginning in 2 Samuel 15 and really through the 19th chapter of
the book of 2 Samuel.
If you want to hold your place here and turn over to 2 Samuel chapter 15, and I want to
just read a few verses of Scripture by way of introduction this evening to really kind
of help us get the setting for this particular study.
If you are taking notes, I've simply entitled this part one of Psalm 3 from the first verse,
many rise against me.
Many rise against me.
Hold your place there in Psalm 3, and in 2 Samuel 15, the rebellion of Absalom begins
in this portion of Scripture.
I would say this as you study these few chapters in 2 Samuel, that this was a very difficult
time in the life of David.
The Bible begins by telling us of all that takes place, and verse number 1, it came to
pass after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and horses and 50 men to run before
him.
And Absalom rose up early and stood beside the way of the gate, and it was so that when
any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto
him and said, Of what city art thou?
And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.
And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed
of the king to hear thee.
In other words, there was no one that was appointed in those particular cities, wherever
these individuals were coming from.
And so Absalom is using this to his advantage, he's using this method really to gain a following,
it says in verse number 4, Absalom said, Moreover, O that I were made judge in the land, that
every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice.
And it was so that when any man came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his
hand and took him and kissed him.
And on this matter did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king for judgment.
Notice this at the end of verse number 6, the Bible says this, So Absalom stole the
hearts of the men of Israel.
Who's the king?
The king is David.
David has been king at this particular time for a lengthy portion of time.
In fact, we find that from the time of his anointing to the time of this particular event
is right about 40 years, according to what we read in verse number 7.
But we find that 40 years had passed from the anointing, and we know that David did
not become the king right after he'd been anointed, for Saul was the king, and there
was a period of preparation.
But we find that David is established as being the king of Israel, and Absalom is stealing
away the hearts of the men of Israel.
The Bible tells us, if you skip down to verse number 10, it says, But Absalom sent spies
toward all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet,
then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.
Whoa, what's going on here?
Absalom had not been anointed to be the next king of Israel.
David is still very much in that particular place, and we know that David, though he had
been anointed to be king, when Saul had already been rejected by God of being king, and David
had opportunity to use his own power and his own might to deal with matters in his own
hands, David refused to lift his hand against God's anointed.
He was going to await God to deal with Saul and for David to be put in that place as king.
But now his own son Absalom has risen up against him, and he says that when you hear the trumpet,
he tells all of these folks, all these spies go through all the tribes, and they say, As
soon as you hear the trumpet, here's what you should shout, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.
Notice in verse number 13, skip down a few more verses, it says this, And there came
a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.
And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let
us flee, for we shall not else escape from Absalom, make speed to depart, lest he overtake
us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.
This is the backdrop, this is the setting for the psalm in which we're studying here
over the next few weeks, and we begin that study this evening, looking at verses 1 and
2.
Again, if you are taking notes, the title for the message this evening, part 1, is Many
Rise Against Me.
And I just want to share this thought with you tonight.
Notice with me the reality of the situation back in Psalm 3, in verses 1 and 2, God gives
us a glimpse into the reality of the situation.
It would seem that after those verses that we read in verses 13 and 14 of 2 Samuel 15,
that at some point after that departure and that fleeing, perhaps on that evening, David
sat down and penned the words of this particular psalm.
And I want you to notice the reality of the situation, really we're given three insights
as to what's going on.
Notice what he says in verse number 1, how are they increased that trouble me?
How are they increased that trouble me?
He then says this in verse number 1, we've used it as our title, many are they that rise
up against me.
David is acknowledging the reality of the situation, he's speaking, and we have the
opportunity by going back to the text in 2 Samuel 15 to determine exactly that this
conspiracy that has taken place, that this revolt that Absalom has led, we skipped over
verse number 12 in 2 Samuel 15, but at the end of that verse it says this, and the conspiracy
was strong, for the people increased continually with Absalom.
So David, he says in this psalm, Lord, how are they increased that trouble me?
Many are they that rise up against me.
Notice what he says in verse number 2, as again we're gaining the opportunity to see
exactly what's taking place, he says, many there be which say of my soul.
Notice what they say, it says there is no help for him.
in God.
Selah.
These that have troubled David,
these that have risen up against David,
these are saying of David,
there's no help for him in God.
God can't even do anything in this situation.
The reality of the situation,
it's interesting, we won't take the time
to go back to 2 Samuel 16,
but perhaps you want to write down
in your notes there and see.
You'll probably remember the name of Shimei,
one of the characters that is referenced there
in 2 Samuel 16 during that time of departure.
And you'll find that in verse number five
of 2 Samuel 16, the Bible tells us
that this man Shimei, he cursed David.
The next verse of Scripture tells us
that he cast stones at David.
And so in verse number five, he's cursing David
and in verse number six, he's casting stones at David.
If you look down later into the chapter
in verse number 13, it tells us that he cursed him,
he cast stones and he cast dust.
And we find here that David is aware of the situation
and the reality of the situation is made known to us.
And as I look at the psalmist
and I look at this particular text of Scripture
and I see that this is not an exaggerated perception.
This is not something that David has just simply conjured up
in his imagination and he's painting this picture
of despair and dismay of, oh, everybody's against me.
No, no, this was reality.
This is what he was facing, this is what he was dealing with.
And we find that throughout the Psalms,
not just here in Psalm 3, but many times
as you read throughout the book of Psalms,
that you'll find that there are references
to this particular time in the life of David
when he references the experience of dealing
with this revolt of his son and all that he dealt with
and the struggles that he had
and the many that rose up against him.
Job tells us this in Job 14 in verse number one.
It's a verse of Scripture that we've often referenced
through the years when you think about the difficulties
and trials, it says, man that is born of a woman
who is a few days and full of trouble.
And the reality is that as we look at this particular Psalm
over the next few weeks and study Psalm 3,
I hope that we'd have the opportunity
to not only understand what David is dealing with
in his own life and understanding the struggle
in this particular situation, the reality of the situation
as we note in verses one and two,
but I hope this evening and throughout the next few weeks
that we'll have the opportunity
to be able to relate to David
and to understand that we too sometimes
are going to face difficulties such as this.
Remember that Paul said that there was an open door,
but he says this, there are many adversaries.
It was not a situation where there was an open door
and everybody was just welcoming Paul
and so excited to see Paul coming to preach the gospel.
We find that often as you study in particular,
if you study the first missionary journey,
that each of the cities in which Paul and Barnabas went into
you'll find that they were just run out of the town
and they faced much persecution, trouble, and difficulty.
And they weren't excited about the people
that were coming to Christ and the livelihood
of those that sold the idols
and other things that were taking place.
They were in opposition to the gospel of Christ
going forward.
And as we begin to study this psalm
and we note the reality here
and he says that they are increased that trouble me.
There are many that rise up against me.
They say of my soul, there is no help for him in God.
Selah.
I find that at times when we consider
the world in which we're living
that no doubt we can at times feel as if
the enemy is increasing.
We can feel the way that David gives us this picture
and the situation he's dealing with.
Again, it's the reality of the situation
that they're increased that trouble me.
Many that are against me.
We find that we're living in a time
in which there are many that oppose biblical Christianity.
It's just a reality that we're facing.
But what does that mean?
What does it mean when we understand the reality?
Next week, we're gonna look at the response
to the situation in the next two verses
and really, that's where we're gonna get
into some real application for us
and understanding that though we understand
the reality of a situation,
how we respond to that situation is of utmost importance.
We do not just bury our head in the sand.
We don't run for the caves and run for the hills
and give up and compromise
and whatever the other ideas or responses could be.
No, Paul tells Timothy this
when he's giving him the truth
in 2 Timothy 3 with regard to,
yea, all those that live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution,
verse number 12 of 2 Timothy 3.
He tells him that evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
And the very next words are but continue.
But continue.
What a great truth, what a great challenge
for us as the people of God.
Turn over to the book of John, if you will.
And I want you to see, listen,
we understand that broad is the path
that leads to destruction.
We understand that narrow is the way
that leads to righteousness.
We understand that there are many that have forsaken.
There are many that have opposed.
There are many that shake their fist at God.
But we are more than conquerors.
Amen?
We are on the winning side.
And we find that as we look at John 15,
and we try to make some parallels this evening
and consider what David is dealing with
in the reality of the situation,
notice what Jesus says to His disciples in John 15.
Beginning in verse number 18, notice what He says.
If the world hates you,
ye know that it hated Me before it hated you.
If ye were of the world, the world would love His own.
But because you're not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hateth you.
Remember the word that I said unto you,
the servant is not greater than his Lord.
If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you.
If they have kept My saying, they will keep yours also.
Now, you understand that this word
that Jesus is giving to His disciples
is a truthful word.
Jesus is seeking to prepare His disciples,
and no doubt it's been preserved for us
to help us to be prepared as well.
I believe that each of us would love it
if everyone loved us.
I just thought that it was wonderful
that you believe the Bible.
Man, that's so wonderful.
We're so excited for you.
But that's not how many people respond to us, is it?
If the world hates you, what do you say?
You know that it hated Me before it hated you.
Notice in chapter 16 in verse number one,
these things have I spoken unto you
that you should not be offended.
They shall put you out of the synagogues,
yea, the time cometh that whosoever killeth you
will think that he doeth God's service,
and these things will they do unto you.
Why?
Because they have not known the Father nor Me.
But these things have I told you
that when the time shall come,
you may remember that I told you of them.
These things I said not unto you at the beginning
because I was with you,
but now I go on My way to Him that sent Me,
and none of you asketh Me whither goest now,
but because I have said these things unto you,
sorrow hath filled your heart.
He had told them at the beginning of chapter 14,
let not your heart be troubled.
But now He's saying because I've told you these things
that sorrow hath filled your heart,
I can understand how they would respond that way,
can't you?
The time's gonna come,
they're gonna put you out of the synagogue,
the one that kills you is gonna think
that he does God's service.
I mean, we're not standing around and saying,
woohoo, praise the Lord, that's wonderful, Jesus,
thank you for letting me know.
No, no, sorrow filled their heart.
But notice what He says in verse number seven.
Nevertheless, I tell you the truth,
is that it is expedient for you that I go away,
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you,
but if I depart, I will send Him unto you.
It's advantageous, it's beneficial for you,
it's expedient for you that I go away,
because if I go or since I'm going,
I'm going to send the Comforter to you.
Aren't you so thankful?
The Holy Spirit of God indwells the saved individual.
And as we have the Spirit of God indwelling us,
it enables us to respond to those difficulties,
it enables us to respond to those trials
in which we deal with.
The reality of the situation, listen,
evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse.
This is a reality of the situation.
We find it as we read the book of Acts,
and you read and understand and study
all that's taking place with the advancement of the gospel
and the challenges and the adversities
and the hatred that the religious crowd
and the lost crowd.
had for the people of God.
But we find that as you study the book of Acts, that there were a group of people that
were empowered by the Spirit of God, and it always convicts me as I read the latter part
of Acts chapter number 5, after the disciples had faced great difficulty, and they had been
imprisoned, they had been beaten, they had been threatened, and all of these things that
have taken place.
The Bible tells us in Acts 5 in verse number 40, and to him, speaking of Gamaliel, according
to verse number 34, he gives some counsel to these religious leaders, and to him they
agreed.
When they had called the apostles and beaten them, they commanded that they should not
speak in the name of Jesus and let them go.
And they, speaking of the disciples, departed from the presence of the council, and notice
the end of verse number 41, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
His name.
That's a group of people that are filled with the Spirit of God.
It's a group of people that are dealing with the reality of the situation where there were
people that were opposing the work that they were called to do, there were people that
had imprisoned them, people that had beaten them, people that had threatened them, but
yet when they depart from the presence of this council, they depart rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name.
The Bible tells us that daily in the temple and in every house they cease not to teach
and preach Jesus Christ.
Wow, what an example for us.
What an example of how we respond to the difficulties in which we deal with in life.
We're told in 1 John 3 and verse number 13,
Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.
John heard Jesus speak those words that we referenced earlier in John chapter number
15.
Did he not?
He was there.
He heard those words.
And now as he's writing to this group of believers in the book of 1 John, he says,
Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.
And as we note the reality of the situation in which David was facing, the circumstances
in which he was dealing with the writing of Psalm 3, as we understand the setting and
we understand the revolt and the rebellion and all that takes place, we understand this
is a real situation that he's facing.
And in the reality of the situation, when those that are against me, they are increased
that trouble me, when there are many that rise against me, when they say of me that
there is no help for him in God, how do we respond to that?
How do we respond?
In verses 3 and 4 of Psalm 3, we'll study that in its entirety next week and really
draw your attention to the response of David in this situation.
And the reality is that I'm thankful this evening that the Scriptures teach us that
we are more than conquerors through Christ.
Greater is He that is in you than he that is in the world.
Amen?
He says, if God be for us, who can be against us?
We say, well, do you want us to make a list?
Because we have some people that are against us.
But what he's saying is that we're more than conquerors through Christ.
We serve the King of kings and Lord of lords.
He did not tell us that being in the service of the Lord was going to be a walk through
the park.
Correct?
Really?
Someone described it this way, I think it was Tozer, I do not quote me on that, I believe
it was Tozer that said that the Christian life can be best described not as a playground
but as a battleground.
Have we not found it to be so?
We're engaged in spiritual warfare.
And as we look at this psalm, there's such an opportunity for us to relate to the psalmist
and understand what he was dealing with personally and physically, historically, the account is
given to us of what he's dealing with, and as we would draw application, we'd say, okay,
what do we do when there's our people that are increased, that trouble me, when there
are many that are rising against me?
When they say that there's no help in God for us.
The response is one of we must run to the Lord, we must run to God, and we must trust
Him, and we must continue, as Paul said to Timothy, but continue thou in the things which
thou hast learned.
But continue.
This evening, I believe, as many of you believe, that we're living in the last days.
Jesus is coming soon, amen?
And soon is relative, I don't know how long it's going to be before He comes back, but
it seems as if His return is soon.
And as we live in the last days, as we live in these turbulent times, if you will, when
there are so many that would rise against, remember, I referenced this a couple of weeks
ago in the second psalm where the Bible tells us that the kings, the rulers of the world,
that they rise up against the Lord, against His anointed, they shake their fist at God.
And the reality of the situation for David is that there were many that were against
Him.
The conspiracy was strong for the people increased continually with Absalom, we're told in 2
Samuel 15 and verse number 12.
This evening, though the first of this four-part series seems to have a negative note, I trust
that we'd be encouraged as we consider that, listen, it's okay to understand the reality
of what we're dealing with, but how we respond to that is of utmost importance.
And as we come in your time this week, as you study through verses three and four, I
hope that you'd be encouraged as to seeing how David responds to the situation which
he's dealing with, and that we'd say, God, would you help me to respond in faith?
Would you help me to respond in courage and in boldness?
Would you help me to respond like the disciples responded in Acts chapter number 5?
Would you help me to have that kind of boldness and courage to trust you and to follow you?
Help us to continue.
There are many that are against the cause of Christ, but God told us that that would
be the case.
So it really shouldn't surprise us.
We still have a duty to fulfill.
Amen?
And as we fulfill that duty, as we are filled with the Spirit of God and we go forth in
the power of God, we get to see what God is able to do.
And we are on the winning side.
Let's pray.
Father, we love you.
We thank you for loving us.
We thank you for the opportunity to study your Word.
And as we begin this four-part study this evening on this third psalm, I pray that you
would help us over these weeks to be encouraged and strengthened.
Would you help us, Lord, to be prepared for the adversity and the opposition that we would
face all throughout your Word as we read of those that have gone before us that have served
you faithfully, that have done a work for you.
We find that throughout those various accounts, there are many times in which we can read
of the opposition.
We can read of the adversity in which they faced and dealt with, the troubles and the
trials.
I'm thankful for the triumphs.
I'm thankful that we have the whole Bible and we know that we are indeed on the winning
side.
We do not need to respond with some level of fear, hiding, compromise, giving up.
But we simply continue.
Continue in your power for your glory.
We thank you for the privilege of prayer, for corporate prayer.
What a blessing to hear the voices of your people each Wednesday evening as they lift
up their voice and bring these various petitions before thy throne.
We thank you that you're a God who hears and answers prayer, that you're able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think.
We pray that you'd bless these next moments in our service, and we'll thank you, God,
for all that you'll do.
For it's in Christ's name we pray, amen.